
00:01	(Speaker A)	France Inter. Léa Salamé, Nicolas Demorand. Le 7-10. 
00:06	(Speaker B)	A round table discussion this morning on the unprecedented attacks on science and researchers by the new Trump administration. We're going to
		speak, Lea, with three great scientific voices. 
00:20	(Speaker A)	Valérie Masson-Delmotte, good morning. You're a climatologist, you've been co-chair of the IPCC for 8 years until 2023 and you're a reference in the field of climate change. 
		on climate issues. Our listeners know you well from the caller ID. You're a doctor specializing in pediatrics and immunity... You're 
		especially the Chairman of the Conseil d'Orientation de la Stratégie Vaccinale. 
00:21	(Speaker A)	You were involved in the Covid crisis. And Olivier Bernet, you're an astrophysicist and researcher at the IRAP IFR. You're one of the 
		initiators of the "Stand up for science" movement in France. 
00:52	(Speaker A)	This movement we're going to talk about. 
00:53	(Speaker B)	And the reason we've brought you together this morning is that all three of you are signatories of a tribune that appears in the newspaper Le Monde and opens with the following words 
		these words. Today, universities and research are the target of unprecedented attacks in the United States, threatening one of the pillars of democracy,
		academic and scientific freedom. This article is entitled "Defending science in the face of the new obscurantism" and aims to alert 
		on the Trump administration's attacks on science and called for a global day of mobilization this Friday, March 7. 
01:34	(Speaker B)	With a few simple words and a few specific examples, tell us what's been going on for the last six weeks in the research community in France. 
		United States. Olivier Bernay. 
01:47	(Speaker C)	Well, I've been working with my colleagues in the United States for 20 years now, and since Donald Trump's inauguration, I've been hearing things that I 
		heard from my colleagues before. Really, I'd never imagined I'd hear such concerns. 
02:02	(Speaker A)	What do you hear? 
02:03	(Speaker C)	So I hear they're scared, they're really literally saying we're scared, they hardly dare to speak. 
02:08	(Speaker A)	Do you have any colleagues who are currently at NASA? 
02:10	(Speaker C)	Absolutely, they're afraid, that's what they tell me, they hardly dare to speak and they're afraid of losing their jobs, they're afraid of having their names erased. 
		data, their work. They are also afraid of losing their residence permits and being sent back to their own countries. It should be remembered that Donald 
		Trump said yesterday that if there were protests on campuses, participants could be put in jail, deported. So I think they
		have every reason to be afraid. 
02:38	(Speaker C)	The situation is dramatic. 
02:40	(Speaker A)	It's true that we've been focusing for the last three weeks, a month, on defense issues, letting go of Ukraine, raising tariffs.
		But it's not just the military and the economy that Donald Trump is shaking up. Science too, we can see it, we can hear it with you, with the 
		same brutality. The words in your column are powerful. 
02:59	(Speaker A)	Unprecedented attack on science, obscurantist offensive, ideological censorship. of information, is this really what's going on? It's on 
		Are your American colleagues alerting you to this, Valérie Masson-Dalmaud? 
03:12	(Speaker D)	Yes, and then you were talking earlier about J. Devance, the American vice-president, who in 2021 declared the university the enemy, Professor 
		the enemy. And science has now become a target. On the websites of the US State Departments, ministries, information 
		related to climate change have been eliminated for defense, agriculture, transport, energy and the environmental protection agency. 
		the environment. 
03:33	(Speaker D)	the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency, which plays a respected global role in oceanic and atmospheric observations. 
		weather forecasting, i.e. to protect people, better manage fisheries and protect the environment. 
03:51	(Speaker A)	The coastline to protect 800 buildings. 
03:54	(Speaker D)	Scientists abruptly dismissed, disrupting the ability to launch balloons and thus improve weather forecasting. A 
		disorganization of the American research funding agency, the NSF, which completely disorganizes research, for example 
		antarctic. Let me give you three examples. Zachary Leib, 30 years old, recruited by NOA 5 years after his thesis. 
04:20	(Speaker D)	It's always hard to get a job for young scientists, even the brightest in the world. You may know him from 
		a great blog where he shares data visualization on climate and polar regions. What he's telling me is that ever since I was a kid, I've been dreaming
		to work for NOA. 
04:34	(Speaker D)	When I was a kid, I used to pretend to give weather forecasts, I used to watch thunderstorms. Her career path led her to be recruited in the 
		the world's leading climate modeling laboratory at Princeton University, NOA. 
04:50	(Speaker A)	This research is to improve forecasts. 
04:56	(Speaker D)	Heat waves or intense rainfall, to enable society to be better prepared. His work came to an unexpected end and 
		he was dismissed. This is also the case for the director of the research program on ocean acidification, an important subject for the 
		fisheries, for aquaculture, suddenly laid off. My colleague and co-chair of IPCC Group 3, Kate Calvin, one of the scientists 
		the brightest I know, chief scientist at NASA, was banned from attending the IPCC plenary session the 
		last week, when the structure of future reports was to be approved. 
05:31	(Speaker D)	The team helping her has been brutally dismantled. She is forbidden to speak to the press and all researchers from US federal agencies are banned. 
		are forbidden to speak with their foreign colleagues. You have to see the degree of intimidation. 
05:41	(Speaker D)	There is no analogue in any recent democratic country. It looks like what totalitarian regimes do. 
05:50	(Speaker A)	And what do they say to you? They say, "Speak for us, look after our consciences". 
05:54	(Speaker D)	Exactly. Jacques Lêbe said to me "I agree to be quoted, thank you for sharing my testimony". He's looking for a job. What 
		What are we in Europe doing to help these brilliant scientists who have been fired? 
06:04	(Speaker A)	Alain Fischer. 
06:05	(Speaker B)	Alain Fischer researchers, we hear, are simply fired from suspended programs overnight. As soon as the words "climate", " 
		diversity", "inclusion", "gender" and even "woman" appear in research work, we're going to come back to this question of words. There are 
		now forbidden words. Is this staggering for you? 
06:29	(Speaker E)	Yes, it's totally unexpected. I never thought I'd see this in my life. So I can take the example of my field, what I know best,
		but it's important to remember that this affects all fields of research. From the most basic research to all applications. 
		climate change and health. 
06:43	(Speaker E)	A few examples from the NIH, the National Institute of Health, the world's largest biomedical research institute. Budget of 47
		billion dollars. In just two weeks, 1,100 employees - 6% of the workforce in Bethesda, where the NIH center is located - were fired. 
07:00	(Speaker E)	It also includes, as Valérie said a moment ago, young researchers. I can take the example of a young postdoc researcher 
		6 years of remarkable work in a very specific field of cell biology. ONIH, who is fired overnight, she is in 
		I hope we'll be able to get it back in France. 
07:18	(Speaker E)	Unfortunately, examples like this are multiplying. They've fired a lot of people, a lot of administrative staff, and said "it's not a big deal". 
		the administration, but it's absurd". It's worth noting that ONIH, for example, within two weeks of Trump's arrival, the number of 
		research contracts, the NIH awards research contracts for all American universities. 
07:36	(Speaker E)	The number of research contracts awarded has been halved. That's colossal. And perhaps the most dramatic measure at the moment, because 
		that can be implemented, it has been suspended for judicial reasons for the time being. 
07:40	(Speaker E)	When a research contract is awarded, there are indirect costs that bring very substantial sums of money to the United States.
		the university where the researcher receiving the contract works. This not only pays for the electricity, but also for the infrastructure, the 
		equipment, pet shops in the field of biology. Well, the rates are up to 50-60% of the contract. 
08:11	(Speaker E)	Trump has decided, the Trump administration has decided that it shouldn't be more than 15%. That's several billion dollars lost for the 
		American universities, which are in great difficulty as a result, are not recruiting. Finally, there are snowball effects which are terrible. 
08:25	(Speaker A)	How does he justify it? We're all familiar with Elon Musk's statements about the Doge we want to chop down with an axe. But for science, for researchers, 
		for all those cases you mentioned this morning, which are chilling for those researchers in biology, climate, at NASA, who are getting fired.
		from one day to the next, what explanations do they give when they fire them? 
08:52	(Speaker C)	There is no justification. We're in a moment that's a bit Orwellian. We simply have the impression that if Trump decides to do it, two and two make one. 
		five. And finally, information is masked, data is erased and scientific truths disappear and no longer exist. 
09:10	(Speaker C)	So I think I'd just like to bounce off what's happening over there. It also forces us to think about what we can do here in Europe. I think that 
		that Europe has a role to play in reconnecting with its humanist, Enlightenment tradition, to try and propose an alternative vision, based on the 
		knowledge, based on knowledge, to propose an emancipating future for these citizens. 
09:35	(Speaker A)	Will there be a brain drain? Has the brain drain already started? Are they going to come to Europe? Are they going to Asia? They 
		are going to leave? 
09:44	(Speaker C)	Probably. So I'd say we're fighting for them to be able to continue working there in the United States. That's what the 
		Stand up for Science movement, which is above all in support of our colleagues in the United States. Also, of course, because we have concerns in 
		France, we might talk about it. 
10:00	(Speaker C)	So maybe some will come. France already has systems in place to welcome foreign colleagues. 
10:08	(Speaker E)	Yes, yes, I think it's part of the mission of our countries, which still have democratic values in the way they practice research and 
		to use scientific knowledge in the service of democracy, to welcome researchers who want to come here. I believe 
		that we need to be prepared. There's a remarkable program called Pause, which has been used by Ukrainian researchers in particular. 
		is managed by the Collège de France. 
10:31	(Speaker E)	But it's not enough to deal with the problem as it is today in the United States. So I hope there will be a program. 
		work, on a much larger scale, and which we might wish were European. It would be great if Europe could show itself as a land. 
		for researchers in difficulty. 
10:51	(Speaker D)	Yes, but I have a different reading, i.e. what is most targeted is all the scientific research in support of development. 
		research to understand inequalities and certain aspects of health, the environment and quality of life. 
		water, air, national park management and climate change, what we call sustainability sciences. And so it's clear that 
		the narrative is that anything hostile to producing and exporting more fossil fuels or accumulating wealth is perceived as the enemy. It is 
		that's going on. And let me remind you that we're funding this American technophile obscurantism, since the United States is the leading 
		France's oil and gas supplier. 
11:33	(Speaker D)	We've gone from Karib d'Ancila to Putin to Trump. 
11:36	(Speaker B)	A word, as I was saying, about what you can read about the National Science Foundation, which oversees American scientific research, 
		who received a list of a hundred or so words, suspect words, forbidden words. Every scientific project in progress that includes one of these words is 
		to be evaluated, re-evaluated, possibly cancelled if the new administration deems its content to be inappropriate among its words. Transgender, disability,
		women, inclusiveness, diversity, discrimination. In preparing this interview, you mentioned maccartism. 
12:24	(Speaker B)	Valérie Masson-Delmotte is clear evidence of this. 
12:30	(Speaker D)	We can also think of Mao's revolution, Germany in 1933, or even France under Vichy, as periods when there was this kind of approach to 
		witch-hunt on the scientific community. And what you were saying, beyond that aspect, is also the fact that the NSF, which is 
		completely disorganized, creating enormous uncertainty about access to funding for thesis grants, for example. So that's what's going to happen,
		is to lose a new generation of young American scientists who are just going to do something else. And that's irreversible damage. 
13:03	(Speaker E)	Just to show the absurdity, today it's not just the NSF, the NIH again, all the bodies that are busy funding and organizing the
		research in the United States. If you have a project today, for example you want to compare the consequences of a given disease between men and 
		women, you're out. That's all. You can see the absurdity. 
13:12	(Speaker E)	If you're talking about population genetics, for example, you wanted to study the genetic factors of different populations, in particular of 
		minorities, of course you're rejected. It's an absurdity. 
13:31	(Speaker A)	You are consoled. No but because it's interesting to use. No, but I take the liberty of using this word, of returning the word that was used 
		during Trump's entire campaign to denounce the WOC which cancel, well there it is they who cancel, there, sorry. 
13:44	(Speaker E)	I think it's fair to say that the Trump administration doesn't like the public service, and therefore research, not only, but by 
		a large part of the public in the United States, dislikes the scientific effect and loves to defend its alternative truths on the Internet. 
		climate, vaccination with Mr. Kennedy, who has expressed himself fearsomely on this front, and doesn't like minorities either, so the 
		programs called D.E.I., diversity, inclusion. I think that's what his presence is all about. 
14:15	(Speaker A)	A word about the new Minister of Health, we don't call him Mr. Kennedy, but his latest statements, Alain Fischer, are... 
		How do you judge them? Is what he says about depression, for example, over? All depressives have to do is take one. 
14:31	(Speaker E)	Little medicine, are they getting better? Beyond words, there are deeds. The day after his inauguration, which was a bit of a tumultuous affair 
		Given his past record, he fired, if I'm not mistaken, 1,300 people at the CDC. The CDC is the Center for Disease Control Atlanta, which plays an important role in the fight against cancer. 
		extremely important in terms of epidemiological control, particularly infectious diseases such as Bavarian flu. Overnight, 1,300 people are at the
		So it's even worse than the words. 
14:56	(Speaker E)	On some lyrics, in fact, he goes back a little bit. I'm thinking of measles, for example. But this guy is very worrying. 
15:03	(Speaker E)	A few months ago he talked about doing away with almost all research into infectious and immunological diseases. I feel 
		concerned. You remind me that I used to be an immunologist. 
15:15	(Speaker E)	It's $8 billion. Well, it's not done, but it's in the pipeline. It's really very worrying. 
15:21	(Speaker B)	Let's move on to France Inter's switchboard, where a former Minister of Health is waiting for us. Agnès Buzyn, bonjour! 
15:28	(Speaker F)	Hello Monsieur Demorand. 
15:31	(Speaker B)	Did you want to take part in this morning's debate on attacks on science in the United States? 
15:42	(Speaker F)	Absolutely. First of all, I'd like to thank you for having the debate and I'd like to thank the scientists for fighting this issue head on. 
		obscurantism that is invading the United States today. But it strikes me that today, only scientists are taking up the cause. 
		when science is a democratic issue. It's an issue that should mobilize us all. 
16:04	(Speaker F)	And so, our battles today, and I would like all those who think that science has an emancipatory value in society, that it is the 
		It's the foundation of our democracies and must be protected, so I'd like everyone to get involved. So, there's the Stand Up for Science initiative 
		Friday, but which is a form, I would say, of one-shot, i.e. we're all going to take to the streets to mobilize, but that's not enough. 
		Today, it's a political issue. 
16:06	(Speaker F)	and there is a kind of disengagement from science on the part of politicians and civil society, and I think that today we have to fight against this 
		collectively to put science back at the heart of the democratic debate. So, for the past year, I've been working on a form of forum to get the public involved. 
		civil society on the issues of science in democracy and science as a promoter of progress, I'm launching a think tank called "Evidence". 
		"I'll be holding a press conference on March 11 to talk about what's at stake. But I'd like to stress that it can't just be that. 
17:06	(Speaker B)	Scientists defending science. 
17:08	(Speaker F)	It goes way beyond that. 
17:16	(Speaker C)	In any case, it raises the question of what's happening in France too. It's important to remember that. We were just talking about words that are 
		used, trials for alleged wokism. This doesn't just happen in the United States. 
17:30	(Speaker C)	We haven't talked about the attack, but it's mainly aimed at the social sciences. The social sciences are also under attack from a number of angles. 
		And so in France, we also have this little music of wokisme at the university, islamo-gauchisme at the CNRS, etc. So it's also something that's been going on for a long time. So it's also something 
		we hear. 
17:53	(Speaker A)	Thousands of researchers and cutting budgets. 
17:57	(Speaker C)	But the shift that's taking place, it's a shift that takes years and years and so we have to be careful about where we're going and so 
		it's very important to remember the importance of scientific facts, which are not the same thing as opinions, and so we need to fund them.
		public knowledge services. 
18:12	(Speaker A)	Just a word to Olivier Bernier, since you're an astrophysicist, and we might have thought that this research, which is a priori more fundamental, less political
		let's say, would be spared. And yet, at NASA, they're cutting budgets too, 20%. You'd think Elon Musk would be more sensitive to the 
		for example. Not at all. 
18:31	(Speaker A)	This too is targeted. 
18:32	(Speaker C)	So, there are 20% cuts on the James Webb Space Telescope project, which is the project I'm working on, which is currently revolutionizing 
		world astrophysics. And so, if Donald Trump decides, in fact, we thought we might see the first stars of the universe with 
		James Webb, and maybe it won't. 
18:50	(Speaker A)	A question about Rémi's Inter app. Isn't there a contradiction between cutting funding for research and what Musk has done with 
		Tesla and Space X? 
18:58	(Speaker C)	I don't think so, because the stakes are different. There's a space rearmament project signed by Donald Trump,
		in which Musk will win huge contracts for his companies. But it's a project for the militarization of space. So we're in a 
		a sort of mix of genres where there's this arsenalisation, a sort of oligarchy, conflicts of interest everywhere. 
19:12	(Speaker C)	So it's not at all in the service of science. And Earth observation services, for example, from space, which are fundamental to 
		climate science, they've been abandoned. 
19:29	(Speaker B)	Valérie Masson-Delmotte ? 
19:31	(Speaker D)	Actually, it's a form of technophile obscurantism. So technology, when it allows you to acquire power, to be remunerative, you learn it. 
		And then we reject scientific findings and knowledge that cause a stir. 
19:44	(Speaker B)	But why the hatred of climate? 
19:48	(Speaker D)	I think there are several things involved. There's this idea that, for example, we could completely privatize weather forecasting 
		when, in fact, no private company is strong enough to maintain balloon launches, radiosondes, radio stations and the like. 
		observation campaigns at sea. As you can see, this is what underpins quality information and observation, even in the United States. 
		world-class models that require investment in fundamental research and that in turn extinguish weather forecasting 
		private. 
20:15	(Speaker D)	And the idea is I think just turn it over to the private sector and everything will be fine. In reality, that's not the case in any country in the world, and it's not the case in any country in the world. 
		not possible. 
20:22	(Speaker A)	What are the consequences of this freeze, of these credit suspensions, of these researchers being laid off, of what's clearly going to happen since it's 
		You could say he does what he says, Donald Trump, Elon Musk. In the coming months, in the coming years, of all places 
		these generations of researchers who won't be able to do a thesis, who won't be able to devote themselves to their field of research, which will 
		What are the consequences for the world's leading power, which was at the forefront of everything? 
20:52	(Speaker E)	Clearly, given the impact of American science, of American scientific research worldwide, the consequences can be quite serious.
		disastrous. There's a certain opportunity for other countries to get a grip on what would no longer be done in the United States. Nevertheless, there are all 
		international collaborations, all kinds of actions. Of course, science doesn't stop at borders, which are going to suffer enormously. 
21:13	(Speaker E)	And we can extend this to what is no longer strictly science, but which is on the edge of science and which are Health applications, the 
		Trump's cuts, for example, what's called USAID, which is international aid, $43 billion a year, that's still not bad, even 
		if in proportion to the mass of inhabitants in the United States, it's not huge. But the cuts are going to cause disasters, this time. 
		of antiretroviral treatment in South Africa, with dramatic estimates of the number of additional deaths that 
		this will entail. It is estimated that there may be as many as 500,000 additional deaths and 500,000 additional infections. 
21:21	(Speaker E)	women deprived of contraception, etc. I won't go on too long. Trump announces that he can't do it immediately yet, se 
		withdraw from WHO. 
21:57	(Speaker E)	You can criticize the WHO, but we absolutely need the WHO, if only in terms of organization and global epidemiological monitoring. The 
		The consequences at various levels are just terrible if this policy is maintained. So we have to try to oppose it as much as possible. 
22:11	(Speaker B)	Academic freedom is fundamental, perhaps articulated with the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution on the guarantee of academic freedom. 
		freedom of expression? Can the American justice system do anything? 
22:26	(Speaker D)	There, it was seized in relation to the brutal dismissal of federal employees. And so, for example, the Scientific Research Foundation 
		American, which plays an important role in the organization and funding of research, theses and logistics. 
		re-hire the 84 people it laid off without keeping track of their e-mail addresses, to give you an example. 
22:47	(Speaker E)	The blocking, the restriction of indirect costs that I mentioned earlier, I won't come back to that, is currently being challenged in court, so is for 
		suspended for the time being. But I don't know to what extent the courts will be able to curb Trump's initiatives. But he's certainly an actor. 
		significant balance of shapes. 
23:05	(Speaker D)	When it comes to climate change, the United States accounts for about a quarter of the world's publications, sometimes in international cooperation, but it's at the top of the list.
		About a quarter as much as China, to give an order of magnitude. And what I see are brutal lay-offs, the fact that we're no longer 
		to be able to use credit cards to carry out field campaigns there, for example. This prevents American researchers 
		federal agents to intervene in crisis situations, when fires or extreme events affect certain sectors. This prevents 
		purchase standard laboratory equipment. 
23:35	(Speaker D)	That's what's going on, so it's sabotage. And it's at the expense of vital information for American society. for the younger generation of 
		American scientists and others trained in the United States. 
23:45	(Speaker D)	Because when you're a young scientist, you train in the United States at the highest level in the world. But also the end of humanitarian aid, that will 
		receive co-financing for scientific research in the South. This will also slow down the progress of knowledge worldwide. 
24:00	(Speaker B)	Sombre tableau. 
24:02	(Speaker A)	Very bleak picture, thank you. And tomorrow is Friday. 
24:07	(Speaker C)	We have to fight, the picture is dark, as you said, but we really have to fight. I'd like to invite everyone who's concerned to come and join us. 
		Friday. 
24:12	(Speaker A)	It's a day of global mobilization for science, for researchers, for universities, for everything that makes up our civilization. 
24:20	(Speaker D)	And show support for American scientists who are under unprecedented attack. 
24:26	(Speaker A)	Where will the gathering be in Paris? 
24:28	(Speaker C)	So in Paris, the departure is at 1:30 pm at Jussieu. 
